In most institutions, all essential strategic and operational functions and tasks are significantly supported by information technology (IT) or can not even be performed without IT. The IT systems of the institution itself as well as their connection to external networks must be operated in an appropriate environment and infrastructure. This is the only way to ensure the necessary availability of IT. The performance requirements of these systems and the network environment are steadily increasing. To meet this need for power, maintain reserves, and run IT economically, government agencies and companies of all sizes have focused their data center IT landscape.

The data center will be the facilities required for the operation of complex IT infrastructures (server and storage systems, data protection systems, active network components and telecom systems, centralized printing systems, etc.) (air conditioning, electrical, monitoring and alarming technology) and premises (eg B. computer room, rooms for the active network components, technical rooms, archive, storage, recreation room, etc.). The main difference between the data center and the server room is that in a data center a spatial separation of the IT systems and the supporting infrastructure (electrical supply, air conditioning technology, etc.) is obligatory. As a whole, a data center should form a security area that is at least divided into at least the organizationally and physically separate "Infrastructure" and "IT" security areas. A data center is either permanently staffed (shift service) or there is a call readiness in unattended times (with or without remote administration option). In a data center, the concentration of IT equipment and data can cause significantly more damage than with decentralized data processing. In any case, the module data center is to be used when using a large computer.

The subject of this module is a data center of medium type and quality. The security requirements are between those of a server room or "server park" and those of high-security data centers, such as those used in the banking sector. In addition to the standard security measures listed here, which have proven themselves in practice, however, in most cases further individual security measures are required that take into account the specific requirements and the respective environment (for example, the risk analysis based on IT-Grundschutz can be used ). Threats from terrorism or force majeure are limited to the standard security measures described here.

On the one hand, the module addresses users who operate a data center and want to check whether they have implemented suitable standard security measures during a revision. On the other hand, the datacenter building block can also be used to provide an overview of the security measures that need to be taken to centralize IT in a medium-sized data center for secure operation. In order to keep the module manageable, it deliberately avoided technical details and planning parameters. The construction of a data center should not be considered by large IT departments without the help of an experienced planning staff or an experienced planning and consulting firm. When outsourcing data center services, this module can be used to check the services offered with regard to their security level.

In contrast to the protection requirements of a server room (see there), many security measures for a data center are not optional, but obligatory. These include, for example, an adequate alarm system and an alternative power supply. Usual and proven for a secure IT operation is a early fire detection in the room and raised floor of computer room and technical rooms and possibly also an automatic extinguishing system.