SAP systems are used in companies and government agencies to automate and technically support enterprise internal and external business processes (Enterprise Resource Planning, ERP). An SAP system therefore typically processes confidential data so that appropriate protection of all system components and data is ensured and the level of protection must be adapted to the risk situation. In addition, integrity and availability also play an important role.

SAP offers an extensive range of systems, components and functions, so that the term "SAP System" can not clearly identify a particular installation or group of components. It is not possible to discuss all available SAP products within the framework of this module, so the presentation is limited to a typical core installation that is frequently encountered in practice.

An example of a typical SAP system is a mySAP ERP system, formerly called SAP R / 3, with Enterprise Core Components Human Capital Management (HCM), Finance & Controlling (FI / CO), Material Management (MM), Sales & Distribution (SD), Logistics (PP), Project Management (PS) and Quality Management (QM). The core component is the so-called SAP NetWeaver ApplicationServer (formerly SAP Web Application Server). Further components of the current NetWeaver platform (currently NetWeaver 04) are SAP XI as a data integration platform between individual SAP systems and also between SAP and non-SAP systems as well as the SAP Enterprise Portal as an integration platform for applications and users. These two components are also executed on the SAP NetWeaver ApplicationServer.

A brief overview of SAP systems and important technical terms from the SAP environment can be found in action M 3.53 Introduction to SAP Systems.

The hazards and measures of this module are mainly based on the SAP NetWeaver ApplicationServer, the primary technical component of the NetWeaver platform. Since this basic component already exists in several versions and these differ in the offered functions, the presentation of version-related differences is deliberately omitted. In this way it is achieved that the module can be used over a longer period of time and can also be used for existing SAP R / 3 systems. The focus of the measures and threats is the basic protection of an SAP system at the level of so-called basic administration. The application- or module-related (eg HCM, FI) protection is not part of this module. Since many applications and modules, however, use the security mechanisms of the basic component, the specified measures can also be applied here with appropriate adjustments.

The aim of the module is not to reproduce the existing, extensive documentation from SAP, but to present recommended safety-relevant procedures and noteworthy features. Otherwise you can refer to the existing SAP documentation, which contains detailed technical illustrations. The relevant SAP documentation is summarized in M ​​2.346 Using the SAP documentation. IT security officers and administrators not only help with the module when planning the SAP deployment, but also mention the most important technical aspects that must also be considered in terms of information security.